[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLaws podcast. I'm Jill Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, here's
something I've been thinking about with
respect to China and all of the tensions
with China, which is that it feels very
elite, as in people in DC talk about it,
people in obviously in finance and
business talk about it. It does not
strike me that in the broad and I I
could be wrong, like my judgment could
be off, but it does not strike me that
in the broad public that there are a lot
of people that it's top of mind for a
lot of the public. Weirdly, I think it
was probably more top of mind in the
past, right? And the hollowing out of
America's manufacturing sector. I mean,
that argument is kind of what has given
rise to a lot of the populist politics
that we see nowadays, right?
>> Yeah, that's true. Right. During the
China shock, there were a lot of people
aware that their factories or the towns
that depended on these factories were
getting hollowed out, etc. But, you
know, there's so much China, China,
China. It's not in the media, right?
It's not like it or sorry it's not in
the movies and I'm thinking of like Back
to the Future 2 was it where the main
character's dad lost his job and they
had this scene when he was getting laid
off by his Japanese boss etc. Oh. Oh,
you know what my favorite example of
this is?
>> Die Hard. Yeah, of course.
>> Best Christmas movie ever, but also the
Nakatomi Corporation,
>> right? This was like a whole thing in
pop culture. It's just not at all. Maybe
that has something to do with the fact
that studios still want to do they still
distribute. Are American movies still
getting wide distribution? Like for a
while in China? Like cuz for a while
this was like a big story. or are they
not going to talk about certain things
because
>> this is partially why we have a bunch of
superhero movies by the way cuz they're
just
>> they play in international markets
>> and they're not going to like offend
anyone too much
>> probably.
>> It just doesn't feel to me for that from
like a pop culture standpoint that the
threats from China, whatever they are,
are like getting that much play.
>> We need a good movie about China
developing an AI chatbot that goes rogue
and tries to take over the world. I
think there was an AI plot in the last
Mission Impossible or one of the recent
ones. I haven't seen it. I don't know
who developed the technology. Maybe it
was China. Who knows?
>> It could have been. But anyway, like you
said with Die Hard and there were
several others. I think Michael Kiton
had a book that talked about it. And
certainly when I was younger, when I was
like 11 or 12 and first became aware of
the existence of the world around me,
you know, I remember I had a teacher who
was like really scoldy about people who
drove Japanese cars, for example, and
she talked about how
>> anti-American.
>> Yeah. How awful it was that there were
people coming into our high school
parking lot or whatever that drove
Japanese cars,
>> destroying the fabric of America by
purchasing a Toyota.
>> Yeah. Of course, now you know, buy
Toyotas are made in the US, etc. No one
talks like that with respect to Japan.
But is interesting thinking about like
similarities and differences between our
relationship with China today and our
relationship with Japan in the 80s late
80s etc. when it seemed like that was
going to be the economy that really sort
of hollowed out what we
>> there's a clear parallel here. There are
also some key differences. I'm sure
we'll get into all of that.
>> A land of contradictions, similarities.
Anyway, I'm very excited. We have a
guest I've wanted to talk to for a long
time. the perfect guest because he
recently wrote about this. We're going
to be speaking with John Gans. He is an
author and historian. He's publisher of
The Unpopular Front Substack, which I am
a paid subscriber to. I'm a big fan. And
he's also the author of the recent book
When the Clock Broke: Conmenspirists
and how America cracked up in the early
1990s.
Talk a little uh history. So, John,
thank you so much for coming on OddLots.
>> Thank you so much for having me. I'm big
fan. It's very exciting for me.
>> Very nice of you to say. Does that seem
right to you that like you probably you
pay attention to pop culture that just
today with the China anxiety? It feels
like a DC kind of thing more than a
general public thing.
>> I think that's true. It does feel sort
of a an elite project. There's a lot of
interest curiosity about what's going on
in China and what they do well both in
DC among policy makers and I think also
obviously in Silicon Valley. Yeah.
>> A lot of think tanks are studying China,
thinking about China. Um, a lot of
business people are very interested in
China. But yeah, I don't know. It's
strange because you would think in a in
an age that, you know, has a lot of, one
might argue, paranoid thinking going on,
it doesn't factor that much into a lot
of pop culture. I think the movies thing
might be a part of that. That wasn't the
case.
>> Just the box office exposure. the box
office exposure. But I think in the 80s
and 90s there was definitely more
cultural product which I'm sure we'll
discuss more cultural products that
brought this kind of fear, curiosity,
interest, paranoia to the surface.
>> All right. Well, why don't we get into
the Japan panic of the 1980s and where
it actually started? And by the way, I
was reading the Substack that you wrote
on this particular topic and I fell into
a giant rabbit hole reading uh the
emerging Japanese superstate. Oh
>> and coverage of it. So I didn't know the
author of one of the first provocative
Japan is going to take over the world
type books was a guy called Herman Khn I
think and he is the inspiration for
Stanley Kubri's Doctor Strange Love.
>> I didn't know that.
>> Yeah. And if you read some of the
coverage of his book that came out in
the 1970s, it's really funny because
it's just stuff that you would never get
away with writing today. Um, the New
York Times New York Times review
actually starts out by saying a bullied
Herman Khan who boasts that under all
these 300 lb of friendly fat there lies
a lean and senue intellect. I don't
think I don't think you could start a
book review by saying the author is
>> talking about the author's weight. Yeah.
No, that's true.
>> Yeah, Herman Cotton is a really strange
and interesting character. He is he is
one of the models for Doctor Strange
Love. He wrote a book called On
Thermonrmonuclear War, which is probably
one of the strangest books you'll ever
read. And it's extremely cheerful book
about thermonuclear war. basically kind
of saying it wouldn't be that bad and
saying that you know yeah and I think
this is where the term he may have
originated the term mega deaths and
saying you know yeah we'll get a little
messed up but actually there's so many
people in this country who were so
productive how bad would it really be
>> we'll have some mega deaths don't worry
about
>> we'll have a few mega deaths but I don't
think and he thought that the United
States shouldn't be so fearful about it
but there's another weird interpretation
of the book that this was kind of like
some signaling strategy that the United
States because in the book he said you
can't show that you're afraid to
actually pull the trigger cuz then the
other side will push you around. So in a
way the book was some kind of signaling
strategy in his game theory mind to be
like hey man we're not worried we we
we're writing books that say
thermonuclear war is not that big of a
deal. Very very bizarre figure and I
think some people consider him very
sinister obviously but uh real eccentric
>> but he was actually worried about Japan.
Yeah, I think he was worried about Japan
and he was a little ahead of the curve
actually because he wrote his book in
the I think it was in the late 1960s and
it came out in the 19 early 1970s and he
was describing Japan and its
institutions and predicted that by the
year 2000 that Japan would be the first
economy in the world and overtake the
United States. This was a little bit
before now the later books make a little
more sense. This is really before you
start to see the economic problems of
the United States that would make this
kind of interest and also before the
trade deficit with the United States had
really exploded. So he was a kind of
visionary not in that he got it right
but he kind of prefigured a genre of
books that would only really hit about a
decade or so later. Yeah, Joe, I clipped
this, but reading some of the book now,
it's kind of quaint, but he says his
best estimate is his medium scenario.
And the medium scenario is that Japan
probably passes the US in per capita
income around 1990.
>> Okay.
>> And probably equals the US in uh gross
national product by about the year 2000.
That's the media.
>> The media. So it could have been
>> he's being conservative.
>> But it sounds interesting because it's
very easy to say oh this is going to be
a big problem once the trade deficit is
gigantic right like oh we're really
dependent we we're you know up a creek
etc. But he seemed to have some
intuition that there was something there
in Japan that was like okay there's some
going to be some great out competing in
terms of just based on their
productivity.
>> Yeah I think that he observed correctly
that Japan had made a miraculous
comeback after the war. they had
transformed themselves from being
totally destroyed in the world and to
being from being kind of a producer of
goods that were considered kind of cheap
just in the way we used to think made in
China or made in Taiwan weren't
necessarily signs of quality and then
Japan becomes you know a place where it
>> manufactures items that are still not
terribly expensive but are known for
engineering feats and are quite good and
he also gets into some things you we
might today call orientalist or
centralizing but he had these what he
thought were soci ological insights
about the solidity of Japanese society,
of their education system, of the
relationships between the state and
businesses, and other writers kind of
develop these themes in different
directions.
>> Maybe we'll get into this. Peter
Navaro's book Death by China came out in
2011. He was pretty ahead of the curve
in terms of, you know, 2011, not
certainly not as much as people are
talking about today,
>> but in a way it wasn't the real China
shock in the US.
>> Definitely. Yeah,
>> that was like the whole WTO thing. I
feel like that was really when it kind
of peaked. You mentioned the cultural
aspects of this and it is funny reading
again some of the coverage where
everyone's like I read the chrysanthemum
and the sword or I read Mishima and now
I've cracked the code of Japanese
economic success. But so much of the
panic was actually trying to figure out
how Japan had done this. Um before we
get into all those different
interpretations, what's your story of
the Japanese economic miracle in the
1980s?
>> You know, I think that you have it's
there's obviously the actual economic
facts and the relationship of the United
States with Japan and then there is the
discourse about it.
>> I think what happened is you had a
situation where you had the beginnings
of de-industrialization in the United
States. You had a very strong dollar.
You had a lot of products that were
coming in that were extremely high
quality and attractive to American
consumers. You also had some policies
that are very strange. Caterpillar was a
big competitor with Komasu. They went to
the Reagan administration. They brought
this economic study to the Reagan
administration and they said, "Well, we
want to open up Japan's financial
markets because the the difference in
our currencies is causing this problem."
Now this doesn't even make sense in
economic theory. What what what actually
happened is Japan is the country with
excess savings. So Japanese investments
began to flow into the United States.
Caterpillar suddenly finds Kumasu with a
plant next door to it. So this little
scheme to undermine its competitors
through through currency wizardry didn't
work. The Reagan administration was open
to it because they were into free trade
stuff. So it didn't really break with
their ideology but it was a strange move
that backfired. And then also Japanese
investors were used to very meager
returns and the United States had very
attractive investments going on at that
time like treasuries because of the
vulkar policies had very high returns.
So Japanese savers were very interested
in them
>> and Japanese
investors also started to look at real
assets like they started to look at real
estate and the returns on those things
were so fantastic compared to the way
things were in Japan.
>> Oh yeah. Mitsubishi bought the
Rockefeller Center.
>> They bought the Rockefeller Center.
There was talk of Nintendo buying the
Seattle Mariners. There was there was a
lot of purchasing a lot of downtown LA.
You mentioned the Nakatomi Tower. like
there was all this idea of J Japan
investing in American real estate and
buying quintessentially American
properties and this was kind of
upsetting to people. So the trade
deficit was obviously upsetting people
who actually had a skin in the game of
the industries workers the businesses
Leakoko was not very happy about it. He
wrote about it and complained about it
on TV. But the actual purchasing of
American like these kind of symbols of
Americana
made people kind of get more tense about
this nationalistic fervor. So yeah, the
money was just flowing in and at that
time with the United States had a lot of
deficit spending and we were pumping out
ships and military equipment and the
interest in Japanese savers in American
treasuries just came along at the right
time. Paul Sonis who was I don't know
how many of your listeners are going to
remember him.
>> I do.
>> Okay. So, he was kind of
>> I don't centrist businessfriendly
democratic politician who was a
candidate for president. Not someone you
would expect to kind of like demagogue
on populist terms, but he said in a
speech the UAW, "The Cold War is over
and Japan won."
>> This is obviously a huge exaggeration,
but it was more like the Cold War ended
and Japan kind of paid for it. So, I can
understand from the perspective of Japan
when they're seeing these things bubble
up and anger bubble up in America,
they're like, "We thought we were
competitors a little bit, but
>> Right." But but not this much. Mostly
mostly friendly.
>> Mostly friendly. Yeah.
>> What was Trump doing this time? Did he
have Where was Trump in all this?
>> He was extremely upset about both the
trade deficits with Japan and the
investment in Japanese.
>> He's been very consistent.
>> He's been extremely consistent. He he
published ads in the newspaper. He went
on TV and complained about it. He said
Japanese Japan was ripping us off and
Japan was buying all these wonderful
American things that should belong to
us. So that economic nationalism goes
way back when. And there might be an
argument that his pretextious instincts
were really shaped by that encounter
with Japan as a potential rival.
>> So I think that you know the Japan panic
and Trump kind of being of another age
in a certain way. Um although again some
of these things apply well to to It's
like left its fingerprints on American
society, hasn't it?
>> Absolutely. Absolutely. So, I think that
weirdly those unconscious impressions or
or institutional knowledge or just
hang-ups that stick with individuals
definitely. And you know, he may just
still be thinking of Japan, Japan,
Japan.
[Music]
It's interesting because with the China
anxiety these days like the fear is
right some breakthrough is going to
happen with semiconductors or something
in China and the American companies will
just sort of go out of business etc. But
in the anxiety with Japan was like your
boss is going to be Japanese or the name
of the office building that you go to
will be renamed Japanese etc. That's
very different because people don't
really talk about that we're all going
to be working for Chinese international
corporations in the future,
>> right? And if you look at the image of
dystopia in the 80s like in cyberpunk
literature or in Bladeunner, it's a lot
of Japanese company signage and a city
of mixed ethnic makeup that looks very
chaotic. It looks a lot like cities in
Japan. So yeah, I think people were
really thought and I think it was just
kind of common sense. If you got into a
if you took an airplane ride and you got
into a conversation with businessman
next to you, guy who owned a small
business, he had read in magazines,
newspapers, books, he everyone kind of
like the mi I'm sorry to use this meme,
the midwake at the time was sort of like
Japan is going to take over the United
States. Yeah.
>> Okay. So clearly that did not happen.
No. Um, and the per capita income of
Japan is still a lot lower than the US.
Walk us through like I guess the
bursting of the bubble and what exactly
like why this vision of Japan as a
superstate or whatever did not come to
pass.
>> You know what's really interesting is
that the that the panic coincided not
with the peak of Japanese power but with
about the asset bubble bursting. So you
see in 1992
Rising Sun, the Michael Kiteon book come
out and then and that also
>> you top ticked it, huh?
>> Yeah. And
>> has anyone read it?
>> I have seen the movie. I have read the
book partially when I was doing research
for the book for my book. And at the end
of the book, he included
a bibliography of books he had written
he had read about Japan that that
detailed the the the threat. The book is
not subtle. a group of Japanese
businessmen are involved in the murder
of a very beautiful blonde woman. Uh,
and the detective is tasked to find this
out and he has a meeting with a senator
and the senator they talk about maybe
the possibility of dropping another bomb
on Japan. That's another thing to
remember is that Japan, United States
and Japan in living memory had fought a
war and there was Pearl Harbor which
Americans felt very sensitive about. So
what happened was there was a
creditfueled bubble in Japan and it
burst and it was followed by a banking
crisis, deflation and then all of a
sudden
everything that everyone believed was so
wonderful about Japanese capitalism. So
in in 1982, Charles Johnson wrote a book
called MIDI in the Japanese miracle. And
they said, okay, well, the reason why
they did it is because they had this
wonderful industrial policy which
coordinated investment, protected
industries, guided firms, and it was
kind of a mixture of state intervention
and private capitalism. That was one
theory that was a little different from
the theories that said, "Oh, the
Japanese have some special cultural uh
Confucianism or whatever." Shinto
Buddhism that was making them do this
and everyone said, "Oh, well, Japanese
firms are insulated from financial
markets, right? Because they have this
close relationship with banks. They
don't have to do they don't have to
raise funds on capital markets. They
have these long-standing relationships.
So, they can do these great long-term
development projects, research and
development projects. They're not
exposed to the quarterly pressures of
American companies, so on and so forth.
Then after the bubble crashes, everyone
looks at all this stuff.
>> It's like, "Oh, wait."
>> They say, "Oh, this was a horrible
system of crony capitalism where the
government was protecting people and
there were bad loans on the books and if
there had been functioning markets and a
lot of these things wouldn't happen." So
suddenly all of the things that appeared
most of the things, not all of them, but
many of the things that appeared really
impressive about Japanese capitalism,
all of a sudden people discovered what
the downsides were. But this didn't set
in in the United States. Japan was there
was an outflow. There was a sudden huge
outflow of Japanese funds. They had
invested. Yeah. I mean between 1988 to
the end of 1990,
Japanese investors invested about $52
billion in the United States from you
know that includes everything from
buying companies to real estate to new
factories. And then in the first few
months of 1992,
that figure had dropped to 2.3 billion
and they made a net investment of 30
almost $ 31 billion in securities and by
1992 they were net sellers of government
securities.
>> They took some real baths like this
financier Manuro Isutani he and this was
one of these things that upset
Americans. He bought Pebble Beach. He
sold it for a loss of about $350
million.
Yeah. So, by the early 1990s, the tide
was kind of going out, but the upset
wasn't. And part of why this happened
was the United States still had a close
economic relationship, but there was a
election going on and a Japanese pol
election the United States and a
Japanese politician made a very
inmperate remark about the appearance
and abilities of American workers. He
said that they were not able to read in
many cases that they were overweight and
this caused a massive rage in the United
States and a lot of politicians going
into the election year obviously jin
this up.
>> We talk about '92 here.
>> This is this is in 1992.
>> Oh, is this the whole Atari Democrat
thing?
>> The Atari Democrats are a little
different. They wanted they were among
the people who were really curious about
I think state industrial policy in
Japan. I missed this whole era of
American history, by the way. Firstly,
because I was like 8 years old, but
secondly, because I was in Japan. We
didn't hear a lot about it. So,
>> Well, you were there as it as the bubble
popped.
>> Yeah. So, I never I have no memories of
experiencing this feeling of Japanese
supremacy. I have a lot of memories of
feeling like the economy was very
downbeat.
>> Oh, wow. in the sort of early 2000s when
I came back and when I was actually a
teenager and sort of aware of my
surroundings.
>> Yeah. Did you ever get the sense that
they felt like it was a miss it was a
lost golden era or a missed opportunity?
>> I mean I think there was a little bit of
nostalgia certainly in the finance
community. Um you know people could
remember what the dealmaking days were
actually like but beyond that I'm not
entirely sure.
>> Gotcha. This summer, all the bros read
Ezra Vogel's Deng Shop biography, but he
also wrote, and I think you talk about
he wrote a Japan book in 1979, Japan is
number one lessons for America, which I
think you talk about. Is that does that
book hold up? Was it good?
>> I think that that book is one of the one
of the more serious books. I mean, you
know, he's a real scholar and and it was
more a real analysis of institutions. It
doesn't get into the kind of there may
be a little armchair sociology in there
about Japanese cultural mores, but
there's definitely much more hard
analysis of the relationship between
government and business in Japan.
>> Let's talk a little bit more about
actually 1992 and the politics of that
time. You mentioned Paul Sis.
>> Yeah,
>> he did win a primary somewhere, didn't
he? Like win New Hampshire or something.
Anyway, but more importantly, that was
also the year that Ross Perau ran as an
independent and then he dropped out and
then he got back in the race and he had
a pretty good showing. He may have
tipped the election to Clinton. I think
there's some debate about that. I know
his main focus was NAFTA.
>> But was this was the was there a Japan
element to his populism? There was no
one in in in politics at that time who
was worried about the future of American
economy, industry, even our political
supremacy in the world that was not
fixated or focused or had a comment to
say about Japan. And Ross Pearl was not
an exception. He was both a
protectionist. So he thought that the
United States's trade policies were
giving us were leaving us in a bad place
with regards to not only Japan but also
at that time West Germany German
unification had just happened and South
Korea but he also
was very curious about the way he
believed he wasn't really much he was a
big capitalist not much of a free trader
so he was really attracted to the close
relationship between business and
government in Japan And he also was very
proud of the close-knit nature of his
companies. A delegation of Japanese
businessmen, I think from Toyota, came
to visit Electronic Data Systems, his
his firm, and they praised him and they
said, "You're of all the companies in
the United States, you're the most
Japanese."
>> I bet they said that to everyone,
>> maybe, probably. But he was extremely
proud. He was like, he said, "Every
worker is a brother. That's my that's
the way Japanese companies run and
that's the way I run." So he thought we
needed to adopt policies more like Japan
of between cooperation of business and
government.
>> This is something I find so interesting
because in the Japan panic at that time
like one of the thoughts was well Japan
is very bureaucratic but in a good way.
It's very like consensus driven and we
have big groups of people who get
together and make a decision that's good
for everyone. And then when you fast
forward to today and all the angst about
China, it's very much like well China
has an authoritarian system of
government and China can decide by a
single person uh what it's going to do.
It's going to build like a huge
high-speed rail and that's not consensus
driven. It's funny how it kind of
flipped.
>> Yeah, that is interesting. I there
wasn't the sense that there was
direction or command and there was like
a really strong political system behind
all this. It was a series of, you know,
on the smarter end, really good
institutions and great education. On the
more pulpy, poppy end of cultural
essential features that made them
extremely good at this. The way that
they presented Japan was like there's no
center of power. This is an interlocking
Borgl like corporations and businesses
are all cooperating in different ways.
It wasn't like, oh, there's an
authoritarian state with a leader. This
leaderless authoritarianism. And there
was some kind of fears that were
reminiscent maybe you got to also
remember that the cold war is winding
up. The Soviet Union is no longer the
primary opponent or rival United States.
So the collectivism of Japan becomes the
thing that's set against American free
enterprise and rugged individualism.
Some people view that in a it's a it's
an interesting mix of admiration and
envy and also kind of fear and saying,
"Oh, we're not like that as Americans."
So, it's a little bit different. I mean,
it's also different because the United
States and Japan were ostensibly
military allies. They were in the same
kind of block in the Cold War. They were
arguably part of our empire, kind of
under our protection. The discourse was
that the that Japan was sneakily kind of
getting out from under American hegemony
to set up their own. And that doesn't
make a whole lot of sense in historical
retrospect or even was a possibility.
>> No,
>> China was obviously never had that kind
of relationship with the United States.
They were always I mean they were we
organized a reproachment with them but
they were never an ally or even one
might say I don't I think vassal state
is putting it far too strongly but but a
part of the western block.
>> This is I want this is exactly where I
wanted to go to because one obvious
difference besides the pop culture and
everything else with US China is that
today in 2025
there are people who are very worried
about war with China. If China were to
forcibly were to blockade Taiwan, would
DC feel impelled to enter a war? Is the
Chinese industrial might going to sort
of hollow out our capacity to even like
build weapons at some point because we
don't have any efficient factories in
the United States. I mean, that is a
very that's very different, right? Were
there shades of that?
>> There were some very small shades of it.
The more hysterical books imagined a
shooting war between the United States
and Japan, a Japanese total
re-industrialization that included
remilitarization.
>> This doesn't make a lot of sense because
Japan is very insistent on his pacifism.
I mean, that might be changing now, but
this that fear was really not one of the
more realistic ones projections. So,
there was a little bit of worry about
that. I think people were fantasizing
and imagining Japan as a rival to the
United States that would eventually be a
military rival or could be a military
rival.
>> But no, from so far as I know, there was
one book, The Coming War with Japan.
Most of the others viewed it as a
economic war and a cultural war. But the
fantasy of
>> like they were gonna do Pat Buchanan had
an essay in a book about trade policy
where he talked about they've decided
after losing World War II they're going
to take the economic road to build their
empire. So it was more like using war as
a metaphor but there was I think fewer
worries about the actual military might
which makes sense.
[Music]
Can I push back on one thing which is
the premise of this entire conversation
please?
>> No, but the way we started out we were
talking about like the Japan panic
really resonated with America and I
guess my question is like yes there were
books. Yes, there were some characters
in movies and things like that, but did
it actually resonate in the political or
social sense? Because, you know, I'm
looking at a headline right now from
1992 and it says, "Harsh views on Japan
may help fuel Perau campaign." Well,
Perau ran unsuccessfully for president.
So, I would argue they did not in fact
help him. Well, I would say that he had
the most successful third party
candidate
in recent about 20% of the vote, which
is significant. I think about twothirds
of Americans by 1989 believed I mean
there's reason for this because the
Soviet Union looked like it was on its
last legs but believed that Japan was a
bigger threat than the Soviet Union and
a lot of politicians went on the stump.
Songis tried to Japan bash as they
called it. Pat Buchanan went to pan
bashing Clinton less so but I would say
there was a side of Clinton's campaign
and a side of his eventual staffing of
his of his administration that was
definitely a lot closer in thinking to
the people who are worried both worried
about and and admiring of Japan. They
went in with the intention of being
really hard-nosed about certain trade
negotiations and they also and this is
not we talk a lot about industrial
policy. There was discussion of
industrial policy back then. There was a
side of the Clinton administration that
looked at Japanese industrial policy
and protectionism and said this looked
very interesting.
>> We may be living in a very different
world if the bubble doesn't pop in Japan
and those policies start to make more
sense. So the side of the Clinton
administration, I mean, that that is
both interested and wants to take a
tougher eye on Japan, it kind of becomes
a moot point as Japanese economy kind of
collapses and fades away. So it was a
really pivotal moment and yeah, I think
that it's such a strange thing that it
was everybody was fixated on it. It was
such common sense. Politicians ran on
it, arguably demagogued on it. And then
it's kind of a historical curiosity. M
yeah no
>> can I ask one more question which I
don't know if you'll have the answer to
this but I've always wondered about it
>> why was there not as much hand ringing
over Korea say cuz on the face of it
this is a country that also very rapidly
developed economically also had similar
relationships with the US US military
presence and some US investment and
things like that but it all seemed to be
directed at Japan rather than Korea
I think that that is because of the
United States's history with Japan and
the war which had it in our imagination.
I think also Japan at that time was a
kind of cultural hegeimon in East Asia
in the way that maybe South Korea is now
in terms of their exports of pop culture
and video games and art and music and so
on and so forth. I think that's a big
part of it. I think also there's a great
book by an author Drew McKivik called
Consuming Japan. I think Japan in a way
was a lot of Americans fir and he argues
that Japan in a way was a lot of
Americans first contact with
globalization
and it was both very interesting but
also a little scary and alien and I
think perhaps China the rise of China
the rise of South Korea it doesn't look
so weird anymore because we went through
the experience of Japan and also because
the experience of Japan kind of turned
into a nothing so perhaps some of the
culture memory of that or the
familiarity we have with other cultures
from Japan. I don't think we we
Americans are so used to are more
cosmopolitan than I would say than we
are at the beginning of the 80s. Yeah.
>> Japan throughout all of this. I mean it
was cool, right? Like Sony Walkman were
always cool in the United States. People
look at this the Chinese EVs and they're
very impressive, right?
>> I don't know if any of them are like
cool. like we don't really have Chinese
branded other than Laboos actually,
which I think is like the first time
there was a specific Chinesemade
Capital B brand that sort of
>> I was going to say like we joked about
doing a Libu episode before, but like I
think we actually should cuz this is
probably China's like biggest cultural
export
>> ever thing. But like Japan is just so
cool that
>> they created a lot of really inexpensive
but extremely interesting and fun
devices. I mean, and
>> and I missed my Game Boy. I got to say
>> I missed my Miniis player and it wasn't
even that useful. It was just really It
was just really neat. Yeah.
>> Nintendo, right?
>> Nintendo, Sega. The design was terrific.
>> I think one thing that Japan and this
was also American businesses were really
curious about how Japan did. They said,
"Oh, they have all these wonderful craft
traditions and all these wonderful craft
traditions are not left behind. They're
incorporated into industrial
production."
>> Detail oriented
>> detail oriented engineering. a lot of
paying attention to design and
aesthetics. So that I think was a big
reason why a lot of those products were
really nicely designed. I think it's a
sad thing in a way. I think there's a
little bit of of China of people think
starting to think Chinese cars are cool.
Japanese cars were always like that's
reliable and wellb built. But they
weren't like they were kind of like it's
a little boring.
>> Okay.
>> To own a Japanese car. Japanese
electronics I think were always like
this is really neat. I think it was not
necessarily maybe Lexus was the
exception, right? But Toyota, Honda, I
think these were Oh, this very practical
practical choice. I think there's a
little bit of chi of Chinese car culture
starting that's like, oh yeah, they're
really making some cool looking stuff
over there now. And also, there is a
beginning, you know, you see lots of Tik
Toks and reals and so on and so forth of
Japanese of of I'm sorry, Chinese
cities. Yeah.
>> So, I think there's a beginning of I
don't know want to call it China chic,
but definitely like wow amazing things
are happening in China. So, I think
there's a little bit of that.
>> I'm not a young person anymore. So, I'm
not and I I think there's also just
like,
>> you know, Apple is so dominant in in
consumer electronics and you don't need
that many devices anymore, right? So the
fact is we don't need CD players, we
don't need Walkman, we don't need minis,
we don't need all these different
things. So there there was this like
kind of wonderful market that had all
these different interesting gadgets in
it. And I think that that fascinated
people and your phone or your computer
does all of that now.
>> I find that to be I mean this is just a
factor totally of aging and nostalgia,
but as we were just saying, I find that
to be a little sad and thought those
devices were actually better in certain
ways. Yeah,
>> Joe, I just remember the car my mom had
in Tokyo in the early 1990s.
>> What was it?
>> It was called My Fair Lady.
>> Wait, what?
>> It was manufactured by Nissan and it was
actually a really cool looking car, but
it had a terrible name. So, I don't know
if it would be considered cool or not.
>> They often switch names. I think when
they came to the United States, they
would have consultants tell them that
branding would
>> Nissan Fair Lady Z.
>> I think so. I'd have to like really nice
looking car.
>> It was some sort of sports car.
>> Like a Citron almost.
>> That looks cooler than I would associate
with a typical
>> Yeah. I thought it was going to be some
kind of like minivan or Suburban.
>> Yeah. Wow.
>> Yeah. Very cool.
>> That's an extremely cool looking car.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, it was. It just had a very strange
name. I always remember that. I remember
like staring at the steering wheel
because I think it was like printed on
it. Anyway, back to the topic at hand.
So there are clearly parallels between
the Japan panic and a lot of the fear
around China at the moment. On the other
hand, there do seem to be a lot of big
differences. Uh number one, China is not
a tiny island with a lack of natural
resources and farmable land and things
like that. It has a much bigger
population.
Walk us through where you see the
biggest areas, I guess, of similarity
and difference.
>> I mean, exports were a big part of the
growth of both. There's obviously a
strong state in both. In one case, it's
more of this vaunted Japanese
bureaucracy, which then turned out not
to be so great. In the other side, it's
the Communist Party and state banks. Big
trade surplus is a big part of it. But
there a big difference. I mean, China's
a lot bigger, has a way bigger
population. I think its political system
as you were saying it can kind of make
things happen and prevent things from
happening make really radical intrusions
in the financial system. It doesn't have
infinite power in that regard. I think
I've heard you guys discuss that on on
but I think they have definitely a
little more political economic firepower
than Japan has and I think part of that
is you know the strength of the
communist party as an institution and
the size of the population. It is
interesting to think like here in 2025
we could have a conversation and be like
you know what China's really successful
because it coordinates its banks with
its manufacturers. They have this very
intense ideological grooming such that
executives are major. They believe in
the Chinese Communist National Project
and they're willing to sacrifice
returns.
>> Willing to sacrifice returns and all
these things. And in theory, and I don't
know what's going to happen, but in
theory in two years, we could go back
and say, oh, they had all these corrupt
relationships between the companies and
the banks.
It was all this crony capitalism, etc.
It is hard to know in real time what
factors are real in success because I do
find when I read stories about the
degree to which like the CEO of Huawei
like deeply believes in the CCP and the
sort of nationalist agenda like yeah wow
that's it's very compelling. I could see
how there's this alignment but then you
know something could happen in a few
years later you're like oh that was
really silly how they like you right
it's hard to know in real time.
>> Yeah I think that's absolutely true. I I
don't think you know we should be
complacent or but but I think it's an
interesting lesson of the history here
is just things can go from being common
sensical the biggest threat everybody
knows that they're going to they're
going to win everybody knows that they
have a better system and then a few
years later everyone is like what were
we thinking why did we think that and we
could there they had so many internal
problems that were just out of this and
that's kind of the same way with
financial bubbles bursting I guess you
could talk about these as also as like
political bubb bubbles is that
everyone's like, "Oh, wow. Look at this
big combine, this big system that's kind
of humming along and then things are
going on behind the behind the scenes
that are like, oh, there's an intrinsic
flaw that's making its way to the
surface and then it kind of manifests
itself." So George Soros gave a great
speech one time making this exact point
that there is a similarity between what
you he would call financial bubbles and
like political bubbles where you believe
in a system and then something emerges
that sort of irrevocably shakes your
confidence in the system. So I think I
find that analogy very compelling.
>> Yeah. But Japan didn't cease to exist.
It's still one of the richest thriving
peaceful prosperous.
>> It's not a terrible place to live. Yeah.
It's not like it went back to the stone
age. So I think that that's also just
very growth mindset, but it's still I
think has an extremely low rate of
unemployment, healthy, relatively
healthy population, good education, not
a terrible place to live.
>> Just on this point though, why didn't
Japan get into the sort of software side
of technology as much as it did on the
sort of hardware side in the 80s and
'90s?
>> You know, I think that that is a
question I don't exactly know the answer
for, but that's often given as the big
mistake that they made, right? So
Japanese companies made an investment
decision at just the wrong time that
that hardware and I think it was
partially because they were always just
really good at developing hardware and
they had developed a lot of
institutional knowledge about making
devices and improving devices improving
hardware and they were like look this is
what we're good at. I also think that
there is a certain to not to get into
too many cultural explanation but there
is a certain conservatism in Japan about
tools about about devices and things
that are seen to work aren't quickly
gotten rid of.
>> The Japanese government just had to kind
of wage an internal jihad to get people
to get its own bureaucracy to stop using
floppy discs. Japanese companies still
often use fax machines.
>> Yes. As Tracy knows,
>> I know I used to part of my job used to
be monitoring a fax machine for press
releases and most of them that came in
were from Japan
>> and this was like the mid200s.
>> Yeah. And I think that there's that that
sense that some things, some ways of
doing things, some processes, some
technologies are good and there's not
any real reason to replace them. And
obviously like when productivity is your
number one goal that's not necessarily
again it may make in some way I find it
very charming and I find it also one
theory I've read is that the reason why
unemployment is very low is because
somebody has to be there to get those
faxes and they're not that Japanese
companies are not that keen to adopt
software that might replace a worker. So
there's a certain kind of pro-social
attitude and not and not doing these
upgrades. But yeah, the the transition
to the software
age was one of those places where Japan
is thought to have made a wrong turn.
>> Yeah. New Jersey, they still don't let
you pump your own gas. Right. We we have
our own cultural own cultural
dimensions.
>> New Jersey famously socially oriented.
>> That's right. John Gans, author of The
Unpopular Front, Substack, and the
recent book When the Clock Broke. Thank
you so much for uh coming on OddLog.
Thrilled that we made this happen.
>> Yeah, thank you. Thank you so much,
[Music]
>> Tracy. That was a lot of fun. I do think
that Japanese stuff seemed really cool
back then in a way again. And maybe we
should talk more soon about the rise of
China, the brand, and whether there's
whether it will break through.
>> Let's just do the Laboo.
>> Yeah, we'll do it. We'll do it. Um
>> just give in. It's inevitable.
>> Someone told me that if you go to the um
the running shoe subreddit,
>> there's a lot more mentions of there's I
think there's Ant is like the Nike of
Japan that you see more mentions of them
on like I I tried to build a scraper of
brand mentions over time. I couldn't get
it done on Reddit. So I do think we
should talk about that. But you know
that was this whole aspect of Walkman,
Nintendo, those were cool brands the
whole time.
>> You know what's interesting about Nike
and China is that there was a big push
back domestically against Nike products
because of rising nationalism in China
and the idea that maybe Nike had made
some missteps that like offended policy
makers or people there. But no, overall
like having this conversation from 2025,
given what we know about Japan today,
the whole thing seems like, wow, that's,
you know, it seems very surreal.
>> Seems very quaint.
>> It feels very
>> like this idea that we were really
worried that a relatively small island
was going to take over military that we
had a base on, right? That
>> more than one base, just to be clear,
>> multiple bases on that we were as
military related that there was that
much anxiety. a sort of interesting
chapter in our history.
>> I do think it's also interesting again
to think about like how much a lot of
the strengths and weaknesses have
flipped in perception. The idea that
bureaucracy and consensus decision
making was once seen as this competitive
advantage and now it's totally the
opposite.
>> I mean in every context right you say oh
one of the great things about the US we
have all these great checks and balances
etc and then suddenly we like can't
build anything or get any laws passed.
Oh, one of the big problems with the US
is there are so many veto points and you
can't get anything done. It's just
whatever the mood is at the time, the
same set of conditions will either be
get the blame or the credit.
>> It's just a giant pendulum swinging back
and forth. Markets and politics.
>> That's right.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Traceeway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow John Gans.
He's at Lionol_trolling.
Follow our producers, Carmen Rodriguez,
at Carmen Arman, Dashelbennet at
Dashbot, and Kaleb Brooks at Kalebrooks.
For more OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about parallels between
Japan and China, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]